doc/diphtongues.md, before:

# Recognizing diphtongues

This document gathers some rules about diphtongues desmabiguation. It is not exhaustive though, and in case of doubt, looking up the word in a dictionnary indicating diphtongues is necessary.

## Introduction.

This document is only relevant to the modern ecclesiastic (*roman*) pronunciation of the prose: some hymns contain diphtongues or even triphtongues for the sake of metrics, and some diphtongues disappeared with the pronunciation reform of the XIXth century. One common example of a diphtongue transformation is *cui* which is usually bisyllabic but can be monosyllabic in some hymns. These exceptions are not treated here.

The main sources for this document are the *Liber Usualis* by Solesmes, 1961, and *The Correct Pronunciation of Latin According to the Roman Usage* by Rev. Michael de Angelis, C.R.M., PhD., available on [arhive.org](https://archive.org/stream/correctpronuncia00dean#page/n7/mode/2up), which can be considered as the two main *primary* sources.

The usual explanation about diphtongues does not consider the semi-consonnant *u* after *g* or *q* to start diphtongues, for example *qui* is usually considered as consonant *qu* + vowel *i*, not consonant *q* + diphtongue *ui*. This is a rather arbitrary choice, but we will follow it as it seems the be the most usual convention. The semi-consonnant *i* (*j*) is also not usually conceptualized as part of a diphtongue (*iam*).

As we are mostly focused on Liturgical latin where diphtongues *ae* and *oe* are noted *æ* and *œ* and thus do not constitute ambiguities in liturgical texts, we will not consider them.

With this in mind, Latin has only few possible diphtongues:

- *au* (main vowel *a*, short *u*)
- *eu* (main vowel *e*, short *u*)
- *ei* (main vowel *e*, short *i*)
- *ay* (main vowel *a*, short *y*)

which means that *ou*, *ai* and *oy* are never diphtongues.

Except in modern composition, Latin has no triphtongue (the neologism maieutica could be considered one).

A good starting point for the study of diphtongues in Latin is *Vox Latina* by W.S. Allen.

## General considerations

#### general rules

A sequence of two vowels is never a diphtongue when the second one comes from a desinence: *me-us*, *e-unt*, *aure-us*, *om-ni-a*.

#### ay

*ay* is rare but always a diphtongue (*Raymundus*).

#### au

*au* is a diphtongue most of the time: *autem*, *gaudium*, *audire*.

#### eu

*eu* is a case with many rules:

- in pure Latin, *eu* can be a dipthongue only after *c*, *s* or *n* (*neuter*, *seu*), and in the intejections *heu!* and *heus!*
- *eu* is a diphtongue in Greek words: *Europa*, *Orpheus*, *euge*, *eunuchus*

#### ei

*ei* is a diphtongue only in the interjection *hei!*.


## Disambiguation of sequences of vowels

#### qui+vowel, gui+vowel

For these, the rule seems to be to cut after the *i*, ex: *re-qui-em*.

#### desinences

The most difficult cases are those where *eu*, *ia*, *au* or *iu* are the last vowels of a word. In this case it seems safer to consider these as different syllables. Exemple: *me-us*, *om-ni-a*, *e-unt*. 

TODO: list exceptions.

Commit message:

add rules for semi-consonant i

doc/diphtongues.md, after:

# Recognizing diphtongues

This document gathers some rules about diphtongues desmabiguation. It is not exhaustive though, and in case of doubt, looking up the word in a dictionnary indicating diphtongues is necessary.

## Introduction.

This document is only relevant to the modern ecclesiastic (*roman*) pronunciation of the prose: some hymns contain diphtongues or even triphtongues for the sake of metrics, and some diphtongues disappeared with the pronunciation reform of the XIXth century. One common example of a diphtongue transformation is *cui* which is usually bisyllabic but can be monosyllabic in some hymns. These exceptions are not treated here.

The main sources for this document are the *Liber Usualis* by Solesmes, 1961, and *The Correct Pronunciation of Latin According to the Roman Usage* by Rev. Michael de Angelis, C.R.M., PhD., available on [arhive.org](https://archive.org/stream/correctpronuncia00dean#page/n7/mode/2up), which can be considered as the two main *primary* sources.

The usual explanation about diphtongues does not consider the semi-consonnant *u* after *g* or *q* to start diphtongues, for example *qui* is usually considered as consonant *qu* + vowel *i*, not consonant *q* + diphtongue *ui*. This is a rather arbitrary choice, but we will follow it as it seems the be the most usual convention. The semi-consonnant *i* (*j*) is also not usually conceptualized as part of a diphtongue (*iam*).

As we are mostly focused on Liturgical latin where diphtongues *ae* and *oe* are noted *æ* and *œ* and thus do not constitute ambiguities in liturgical texts, we will not consider them.

With this in mind, Latin has only few possible diphtongues:

- *au* (main vowel *a*, short *u*)
- *eu* (main vowel *e*, short *u*)
- *ei* (main vowel *e*, short *i*)
- *ay* (main vowel *a*, short *y*)

which means that *ou*, *ai* and *oy* are never diphtongues.

Except in modern composition, Latin has no triphtongue (the neologism maieutica could be considered one).

A good starting point for the study of diphtongues in Latin is *Vox Latina* by W.S. Allen.

## General considerations

#### general rules

A sequence of two vowels is never a diphtongue when the second one comes from a desinence: *me-us*, *e-unt*, *aure-us*, *om-ni-a*.

#### ay

*ay* is rare but always a diphtongue (*Raymundus*).

#### au

*au* is a diphtongue most of the time: *autem*, *gaudium*, *audire*.

#### eu

*eu* is a case with many rules:

- in pure Latin, *eu* can be a dipthongue only after *c*, *s* or *n* (*neuter*, *seu*), and in the intejections *heu!* and *heus!*
- *eu* is a diphtongue in Greek words: *Europa*, *Orpheus*, *euge*, *eunuchus*

#### ei

*ei* is a diphtongue only in the interjection *hei!*.


## Disambiguation of sequences of vowels

#### qui+vowel, gui+vowel

For these, the rule seems to be to cut after the *i*, ex: *re-qui-em*.

#### desinences

The most difficult cases are those where *eu*, *ia*, *au* or *iu* are the last vowels of a word. In this case it seems safer to consider these as different syllables. Exemple: *me-us*, *om-ni-a*, *e-unt*. 

#### detecting semi-consonnant i

I is semi-consonnantic only in the following cases:

- vowel+i+vowel
- word starts with i+vowel
- word starts with (ab,ob,ad,per,sub,in,con,circum)+i+vowel

TODO: list exceptions.
