doc/phonetic-rules.md, before:

# Latin hyphenation rules

This document is the translation of a document transmitted by Solesmes, explaining the general rules of hyphenation they use, with some options and exceptions. The rules correspond to the pronunciated adopted in the Church quite recently (50-100 years), but should be easy to adapt to other pronunciations.

The document supposes that the diphtongues are clearly identified. A *liquid group* is defined here as one of the following: *pr*, *tr*, *cr*, *br*, *dr*, *gr*, *fr*, *pl*, *tl*, *cl*, *bl*, *dl* or *gl*.

Almost each rule suffer exceptions due to etymology, the indicated list is not exhaustive.

## General rules

These rules explain how to find the hyphenation point after a syllable according to the letters following the vowel of a syllable:

- **no consonnant:** the hyphenation point is after the vowel. 
    - Ex: *e-i*, *e-æ*, *e-o-a*, *vi-a*,*di-e-i*, *a-vi-um*.
    - This rule seems to suffer no exception.
- **one consonnant (including h):** the hyphenation point is after the vowel.
    - Ex: *ca-do*, *ve-ho*, *a-go*, *o-lus*, *e-rat*, *cæ-cus*, *gau-de*, *ve-ho*, *tra-ho*.
    - Etymological exceptions: *ad-est*, *per-eo*, *sub-igo*, *ob-œdire*, *pot-ens*, *prod-it*, *red-emptor*.
- **two consonnants, no liquid group:** hyphenation point is between the two consonnants.
    - Ex: *om-nis*, *prop-ter*, *ag-men*, *tec-tum*, *ad-do*, *pos-se*, *il-le*.
    - Etymological exceptions: *a-sperges*, *re-spice*, *re-stituto*, *haru-spex*, *lecti-sternium*.
- **two consonnants forming a liquid group:** hyphenation point is after the vowel.
    - Ex: *du-plex*, *A-tlas*, *fe-bris*, *a-gro*, *a-trox*, *quadru-plum*.
    - Etymological exceptions: *ob-lino*, *ob-litus*, *sub-limis*, *ab-ripio*, *ob-ruo*.
- **three consonnants, no liquid group:** hyphenation point is after the second consonnant.
    - Ex: *sanc-tus*, *temp-to*.
    - Etymological exceptions: *con-spicio*, *ab-scindo*.
- **three consonnants ending with a liquid group:** hyphenation is after the first consonnant.
	- Ex: *sim-plex*, *tem-plum*, *mem-brum*, *cas-tra*, *spec-trum*.
	- Etymological exceptions: *a-stringo*, *re-splendeo*, *de-struo*.
- **four consonnants:** very rare case, etymology is applied.
	- Ex: *con-stringo*, *ob-strepo*, *abs-traho*, *trans-trum*.


## Specific rules

The following rules are about specific case that do not follow the general rules:

- **ch, ph, th** are unbreakable blocks as they correspond to *χ*, *φ* and *θ*, hyphenation point is before this block.
	- Ex: *ma-china*, *ele-phantus*, *epi-thalamus*, *es-chato*, *Erech-theum*.
	- Exceptions are extremely rare, but *post-hac* is one of them.
- **gn** is one block, hyphenation point is before.
	- Ex: *re-gnum*, *i-gnis*, *di-gnus*.
	- There seems to be no exception to this rule.
- **sc after a, o or u**: hyphenation point is between *s* and *c*.
	- Ex: *nos-co*, *es-ca*.
- **sc in other cases**: hyphenation is before *sc*.
	- Ex: *no-scit*, *no-sce*, *e-scis*, *e-scæ*, *a-scy-ron*.
- **sch**: hyphenation between *s* and *ch*.
	- Ex: *is-chi-as*.
- **x, not followed by another consonnant:** hyphenation is before *x*.
	- Ex: *du-xi*.
- **x, followed by another consonnant:** hyphenation is after *x*.
	- Ex: *dex-ter*, *dex-trum*.
- **gu and qu where u is a semi-vowel:** general rules are applied considering that *qu* or *gu* is one consonnant.
	- Ex: *e-qui*, *an-ti-quus*, *se-quun-tur*, *san-guis*, *lin-gua*, *lan-gue-o*, *lan-gues-co*.


## Pitfalls

These are not exceptions to the general rules, but cases to handle cautiously.

- **gu with no n before, where u is a full vowel:** ar-gu-o, ar-gu-unt, e-gu-i, e-gu-e-runt.
- **ngu where u is a full vowel:** *lan-gu-i*, *lan-gu-e-re*, *stran-gu-lo*, *fran-gun-tur*.


## Optional rules

Somes hyphenation rules are found in some liturgical books but are not kept by Solesmes:

### Greek hyphenation

Greek hyphenation can be applied to greek words. Ex: *a-po-sto-los*. (Solesmes keeps the general rules here: *a-pos-to-los*).

Commit message:

add a few words from email discussions, and a few etymological rules

doc/phonetic-rules.md, after:

# Latin hyphenation rules

This document is the translation of a document transmitted by Solesmes, explaining the general rules of hyphenation they use, with some options and exceptions. The rules correspond to the pronunciated adopted in the Church quite recently (50-100 years), but should be easy to adapt to other pronunciations.

The document supposes that the diphtongues are clearly identified. A *liquid group* is defined here as one of the following: *pr*, *tr*, *cr*, *br*, *dr*, *gr*, *fr*, *pl*, *tl*, *cl*, *bl*, *dl* or *gl*.

Almost each rule suffer exceptions due to etymology, the indicated list is not exhaustive.

## General rules

These rules explain how to find the hyphenation point after a syllable according to the letters following the vowel of a syllable:

- **no consonnant:** the hyphenation point is after the vowel. 
    - Ex: *e-i*, *e-æ*, *e-o-a*, *vi-a*,*di-e-i*, *a-vi-um*.
    - This rule seems to suffer no exception.
- **one consonnant (including h):** the hyphenation point is after the vowel.
    - Ex: *ca-do*, *ve-ho*, *a-go*, *o-lus*, *e-rat*, *cæ-cus*, *gau-de*, *ve-ho*, *tra-ho*.
    - Etymological exceptions: *ad-est*, *per-eo*, *sub-igo*, *ob-œdire*, *pot-ens*, *prod-it*, *red-emptor*.
- **two consonnants, no liquid group:** hyphenation point is between the two consonnants.
    - Ex: *om-nis*, *prop-ter*, *ag-men*, *tec-tum*, *ad-do*, *pos-se*, *il-le*.
    - Etymological exceptions: *a-sperges*, *re-spice*, *re-stituto*, *haru-spex*, *lecti-sternium*.
- **two consonnants forming a liquid group:** hyphenation point is after the vowel.
    - Ex: *du-plex*, *A-tlas*, *fe-bris*, *a-gro*, *a-trox*, *quadru-plum*.
    - Etymological exceptions: *ob-lino*, *ob-litus*, *sub-limis*, *ab-ripio*, *ob-ruo*.
- **three consonnants, no liquid group:** hyphenation point is after the second consonnant.
    - Ex: *sanc-tus*, *temp-to*.
    - Etymological exceptions: *con-spicio*, *ab-scindo*.
- **three consonnants ending with a liquid group:** hyphenation is after the first consonnant.
	- Ex: *sim-plex*, *tem-plum*, *mem-brum*, *cas-tra*, *spec-trum*.
	- Etymological exceptions: *a-stringo*, *re-splendeo*, *de-struo*.
- **four consonnants:** very rare case, etymology is applied.
	- Ex: *con-stringo*, *ob-strepo*, *abs-traho*, *trans-trum*.


## Specific rules

The following rules are about specific case that do not follow the general rules:

- **ch, ph, th** are unbreakable blocks as they correspond to *χ*, *φ* and *θ*, hyphenation point is before this block.
	- Ex: *ma-china*, *ele-phantus*, *epi-thalamus*, *es-chato*, *Erech-theum*.
	- Exceptions are extremely rare, but *post-hac* is one of them.
- **gn** is one block, hyphenation point is before.
	- Ex: *re-gnum*, *i-gnis*, *di-gnus*.
	- There seems to be no exception to this rule.
- **sc after a, o or u**: hyphenation point is between *s* and *c*.
	- Ex: *nos-co*, *es-ca*.
- **sc in other cases**: hyphenation is before *sc*.
	- Ex: *no-scit*, *no-sce*, *e-scis*, *e-scæ*, *a-scy-ron*.
- **sch**: hyphenation between *s* and *ch*.
	- Ex: *is-chi-as*.
- **x, not followed by another consonnant:** hyphenation is before *x*.
	- Ex: *du-xi*.
- **x, followed by another consonnant:** hyphenation is after *x*.
	- Ex: *dex-ter*, *dex-trum*.
- **gu and qu where u is a semi-vowel:** general rules are applied considering that *qu* or *gu* is one consonnant.
	- Ex: *e-qui*, *an-ti-quus*, *se-quun-tur*, *san-guis*, *lin-gua*, *lan-gue-o*, *lan-gues-co*.


## Pitfalls

These are not exceptions to the general rules, but cases to handle cautiously.

- **gu with no n before, where u is a full vowel:** ar-gu-o, ar-gu-unt, e-gu-i, e-gu-e-runt.
- **ngu where u is a full vowel:** *lan-gu-i*, *lan-gu-e-re*, *stran-gu-lo*, *fran-gun-tur*.


## Understanding exceptions

There is obviously no strict rule for etymological exceptions, but these rules will certainly help:

- **preverbs:** when a preverb is present, the hyphenation point is after the preverb in simple cases: *ab-scindo*.
- **fused preverbs:** when a preverb is fused with the radix, the priority is given to the radix, ex: *trans+scribo* = *tran-scribo*.
- **epenthesis:** hyphenation is usually done after the epenthesis: *prod-eo*.
- **enclitic:** words ending with an enclitic should be hyphenated before the enclitic (to be confirmed!).


## Optional rules

Somes hyphenation rules are found in some liturgical books but are not kept by Solesmes:

### Greek hyphenation

Greek hyphenation can be applied to greek words. Ex: *a-po-sto-los*. (Solesmes keeps the general rules here: *a-pos-to-los*).
